[MUSIC]
This lecture will talk about
microcontrollers in a little bit more
detail.
Specifically, we're gonna talk
about the storage elements and
how you store data inside
a microcontroller.
Some of this is important for us, just
to have an idea of what type of elements
there are inside a microcontroller.
And not just inside a microcontroller
really, but also the memories outside
the microcontroller, cuz these
are important parts of the system.
You always have data,
you need to store it.
So we need to know
a little bit about that.
So first, here's a picture of
taken out of a datasheet for
an AVR at mega 2560 microcontroller.
This at Mega 2560 is not the same
as what's in the Arduino, or
not in the regular Arduino.
In the Arduino uno, it doesn't have this.
Actually I think there is an Arduino
that uses one of these, but
this is the same series of processes
that you find in an Arduino.
And here's some of the information that
you would find right on the front page of
the datasheet.
8-bit microcontroller up to 16 megahertz,
that's the clock frequency.
256 kilobytes of flash memory, so
that tells you something about
the type of memory in there.
Flash memory as you may know, it's a type
of memory that's nonvolatile memory.
So after you lose power when you regain
power, the memory's still there.
So you see this in thumb drives.
Thumb drives are basically flash memory.
EEPROM is also another type of
nonvolatile memory similar to flash.
SRAM is your regular random access memory,
we'll talk about that.
And then peripherals,
that's sort of a general term for
all the other components inside the micro
controller on the chip, like the timers,
ADD converters and all those other things.
So it's got a number of
peripherals that I didn't list,
I didn't put the whole datasheet up there.
But that picture right there,
shows you what the pins look like.
So actually,
where they are configured on the chip.
So that means if you bought the chip, then
which pin corresponds to which function?
And they're all labeled right there.
Actually, this is just a snippet of it,
cuz we couldn't put all the The pins on
this one page, but this is like
the upper left hand corner of the chip.
It shows you the pins that
you can see there and
there are a lot more pins than that,
but they're all labeled with names and
are referred to later in the datasheet.
So let's talk a little bit about
storage elements that you find in these
microcontrollers.
Storage elements are basically
elements that store data.
There's a need for a lot of data; so
you need to store data.
A variety of types of different data.
You can store data,
you can store the program itself.
The program itself is data.
So that has to be stored in some
sort of storage element, as well.
There are different types
of storage elements.
There's a speed performance tradeoff.
So some types of storage are very fast,
but they cost more.
Usually they cost more, because of area.
They take up a lot more area on the chip,
so they cost more.
Where on the other hand, there are other
types of storage elements that are slower
to access, but they cost less.
They are much smaller on the chip.
There's also a power tradeoff
that I didn't mention here.
So most basic storage element,
fastest storage element is the register.
A register stores only a single value.
Now depending on how many bits
the register is, it serves one number.
So if you have a 32-bit data path,
you'll typically have 32-bit registers.
So, it can store one 32-bit number.
It stores whatever you want,
32-bit number.
Maybe the location in
a certain memory locates,
the value in a location
in a memory location.
Some number that you're working with, some
variable that you're working with right
now in the program, something like that.
Very fast.
So when I say, very fast, the access
time is a lot less than a clock cycle,
but it's expensive.
So you can't have too many of them
on chip, because they're so big.
So there are several special purpose
registers that are devoted to particular
tasks on the microcontroller,
like the program counter is a common one.
Program counter is the register that tells
you what instruction you're executing in
a code, it's the address of the
instruction you're currently executing.
So that's something you as a programmer
shouldn't be manipulating,
shouldn't be touching that, but
it's a special-purpose register.
But there are also a set of
general-purpose registers that your
program can actually use for computation,
arithmetic, things like that.
There's also a register file.
A register file is basically,
a group of registers put together.
So these are commonly how registers
are organized inside microcontrollers.
It acts like a memory,
just a very fast memory.
You can only read one or two of these
registers at the same time, but
usually you don't need to read more
than two in a particular clock cycle.
Their instruction operands
are stored inside register files, so
what you're seeing there
is an add instruction.
Add $r3, $r2, $r1.
It's not gonna look like that to you.
That's what the machine
is actually running,
the simple instructions that
the machine's actually executing.
We'll talk about that a little bit later,
but notice it has these operands.
So $r3 is the destination register, that's
the name of a register, $r3 and $r2 and
$r1 are the two source operands.
The two things that wanna
get added together.
So what this instruction does is it takes
the contents of register $r1, contents of
register $r2, adds them together,
puts the results in register $r3.
So commonly these microcontrollers
are reading data out of registers,
putting results into registers.
Because they're fast, you wanna work
with registers all the time if you can.
Can only read one or two at a time and
you can contain, typically,
a register file often has
like say 32 registers.
That's very common to find
in a microcontroller,
32 different registers
that you can access.
So that gives you a hint as
to how expensive they are.
32 isn't much, but that's generally all
you can afford on a microcontroller.
Memories.
Now memories are,
you know what a memory is, it stores data.
But memories are made to store
a lot more data than registries, so
you won't just have 32 registries.
Memories will a lot bigger.
So there are varieties of memory.
One type of memory is called cache memory.
Cached memory, it stores a lot of values.
I'll just give you a ball park
on how big a cache typically is.
This is all ballpark for
right now, but let's say,
modern processing maybe you
got a one megahertz cache.
It wouldn't be 1 megahertz,
1 megabit cache.
That's ballpark, but say, you got a 1
megabit cache and that could be plus or
minus, but that tells you something
about how big they typically are.
So usually they're a lot bigger
than register files, but
they're also slower than register files.
Where a register file, you could access
that in a fraction of a clock cycle.
A cache typically takes you
a clock cycle to access,
a full clock cycle, which is pretty good,
but not as good as a register file.
Still fast and expensive.
They're cheaper than register files, but
they're more expensive
than larger memories.
So that's a cache and that's on chip.
You'd find that on the same integrated
circuit as the microcontroller.
Typically, commonly in the microcontroller
is that we are using what is called
the Harvard architecture.
So you'll have two different caches,
at least two.
You will have a data cache and
an instruction cache.
The data cache holds the data that
the program is operating on and
the instruction cache holds the actual
instructions of the code that
is being executed.
So, it's common to separate those two and
then there's also main memory.
Main memory is like cache,
except it's bigger and cheaper and slower.
So you can see the pictures
right there of main memory.
That's a typical main memory.
If you've ever taken your taken your
computer and installed memory into your
desktop, you'll get something that looks
like what we see in the picture and
you can plug it into
a slot inside the board.
So it's very big gigabytes of memory not
in the CPU, so it's not on the same chip.
By the way, CPU again,
I'm throwing you another term.
By CPU, I'm using that the same
as a microprocessor and
the same as a microcontroller.
Same thing, roughly.
So main memory is not gonna be in the CPU,
it's off the CPU.
It's on the same board, but
it's on a a different set of chips.
In fact, if you look at that memory,
it's multiple chips all put together.
It's connected to the system,
connected to the CPU via system bus.
So there are system bus that basically
has a group of wires, that are written.
Basically, drawn onto the circuit board,
the printed circuit board that connect to
the main microcontroller to the memories.
The memory access is slow
relative to the cache.
So what that means is that in a cache,
you might be able to access
a cache in one clock cycle.
And main memory, maybe you have to wait
100 clock cycles to access on main memory.
So again, that's ball park, but
that's not unrealistic at all.
There's what's called
the Von Neumann Bottleneck,
which is the fact that in
a Von Neumann architecture,
every thing, the data and instruction
are put into the main memory and
the problem is that main memory is
much slower than the processor.
So main memory, like I say,
maybe you wait 100 clock cycles to
access something out of main memory.
So if you say,
you wanna do an add instruction,
you wanna add two pieces of data that are
in main memory, you're waiting 100 clock
cycles for that data to show up and
then the add itself takes 1 clock cycle.
So all your time is going into memory
accesses or it can go into memory accesses
and that is why people use caches, so
that to avoid this Von Neumann Bottleneck.
So, the Von Neumann Bottleneck is
the bottleneck to accessing main memory.
It's the fact that the memory,
it's much slower than the processor.
So to avoid that you,
basically, use the cache.
You try to rely on the cache and
the registers as much as you can,
so that you don't have
to go to main memory.
Now all these complexities
that I'm talking about,
about are you accessing the cache,
the register or the main memory.
A lot of these we will not be
dealing with in this class,
because we'll be writing code
in either C or in Python.
So, all these details of
where the data is gonna be?
Is this register gonna
contain this variable or
is the variable gonna be in the cache or
main memory?
All those issues are dealt
with by the compiler,
if it's C or C++ or the interpreter,
if it's say, Python.
So we are not gonna have to worry about
this level of detail so much, but it's
important to understand the difference in
the different types of storage elements
and how they act and how fast they are,
how slow they are and so on.
Thank you.
[MUSIC]